---
name: Tarski's theorem about choice and the alternative axiomatic extension of NFU.
title: Tarski's theorem about choice and the alternative axiomatic extension of NFU.
speakers: Tin Adlesic
categories: Talk
abstract: /ct/Adlesic.pdf
---
<p>The main advantage of <span class="sans-serif">NFU</span> over plain <span class="sans-serif">NF</span> is that it does not disprove the axiom of choice. Both the axiom of choice and the axiom of infinity are independent, but relatively consistent with <span class="sans-serif">NFU</span>. Therefore, <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + AC</span> is a theory that is rich enough to encompass all the existent mathematics—but with some technical difficulties. Namely, it is hard to work with Kuratowski’s ordered pairs because they are not type-leveled, meaning that the ordered pair does not have the same type as its projections. The fortunate circumstance is that everything can be developed irrespective of how we define ordered pairs, but making them type-leveled yields a significant simplification of exposition. A prevalent solution to that problem in contemporary literature is to postulate a new axiom, so-called <em>axiom of ordered pairs</em>. From our point of view, the introduction of that axiom lacks the proper motivation and justification for inclusion, and it also creates new problems; it can be expressed only by introducing new primitive notions. Such evasions are a common occurrence in contemporary <span class="sans-serif">NFU</span>.</p>
<p>In theory <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + AC</span> we can define type-leveled ordered pairs using Tarski’s theorem about choice which is equivalent to the <span class="math inline">AC</span>. The main drawback for using <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + AC</span> is that we first need to develop all the necessary theory with Kuratowski’s ordered pairs, prove the equivalence of the <span class="math inline">AC</span> to Tarski’s theorem, and only then define type-leveled ordered pairs. This is apparently unavoidable. However, we propose an approach which does that hard work only once: to start with <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + Tarski</span>, then define type-leveled ordered pairs, and then easily prove the equivalence of Tarski’s theorem to the <span class="math inline">AC</span>. In order to justify that shift of axioms, we must show that in <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + AC</span> we can prove the equivalence of the <span class="math inline">AC</span> to the Tarski’s theorem, but then it becomes a self-sufficient result one can just cite afterwards. It is also worth saying that <span class="sans-serif">Tarski</span> seems much more justified as an axiom than the “axiom of ordered pairs”. In order to complete our presentation, we also need to show that the same thing can be done in <span class="math inline">NFU + Inf + Tarski</span>, but the equivalence proof can be mirrored by the former, and that proof will be in fact much simpler. In effect, those two theories are equiconsistent.</p>
### References
<ul>
<li><p>G. Wagemakers, <span><em>New Foundations - A survey of Quine’s set theory</em></span>, <span><strong><em>Instituut voor Tall, Logica en Informatie Publication Series</em></strong></span>, X-89-02.</p></li>
<li><p>J. B. Rosser, <span><em>Logic for mathematician</em></span>, <span><strong><em>Dover Publications</em></strong></span>, 2008.</p></li>
<li><p>S. Morris, <span><em>Quine, New Foundation, and the Philosophy of Set Theory</em></span>, <span><strong><em>Cambridge University Press</em></strong></span>, 2018.</p></li>
